Hello,
my name's Jen Webster,
and I'm a chartered psychologist here at the Health and Safety Laboratory.
And part of my job is to help organizations understand
and improve their safety culture using our ascent model.
And one of the questions I'm frequently asked is what is safety culture?
So I thought I'd give you a brief explanation about what it is,
why it's important,
and how you can measure your safety culture.
The term safety culture was first used in an
initial report published by the International Atomic Energy Agency
way back in 1986,
which identified the organizational and managerial failures
that contributed to the Chernobyl disaster.
And in 1993,
HSE's Advisory Committee on the Safety of Nuclear installations
produced their definition of safety culture.
They said that safety culture of an organization
is the product of individual and group values,
attitudes,
perceptions,
competencies,
and patterns of behavior
that determine the commitment to,
and the style and proficiency
of an organisation's health and safety management.
Some have described safety culture as an organisation's personality.
Another way of thinking about safety culture is the way things are done around here.
Now,
often you'll see alongside safety culture,
the term safety climate also being used,
and it's not unusual for them to be used interchangeably,
even by the experts.
And to illustrate the differences between the two,
I'd like to use the iceberg metaphor,
you know,
what you see and what you don't see.
Safety climate relates to the perceptions held across
the workforce at a given moment in time
about the way things are done around here.
It's measurable.
Safety culture is the underlying shared values,
beliefs,
and habitual working practices that influence health and safety performance,
and these are not always apparent.
In other words,
like this iceberg,
the scale and extent of any issues relating to your safety culture
may not be in your line of sight.
So why should you measure safety climate?
Well,
looking back at 30 years of safety climate research,
Dv Zohar described safety climate as a robust
leading indicator of health and safety performance.
And we know that organizations with a successful health and safety record
use an appropriate mix of both leading and lagging indicators.
As you can see on the left hand side,
safety climate consists of a number of antecedents.
These are the elements that contribute towards a strong safety culture.
By understanding the safety climate in your organization,
you can build on your strengths,
focus on areas for improvement,
and in doing so,
you will find you have
less injuries and near misses
and a workforce that is both competent,
motivated and engaged to work safely.
So I've explained what safety culture is and why you should measure it.
But where should you start?
It's important to have a plan,
and we recommend you use HSL's ascent model
to guide you
through the change that you want to make,
and you do this through a series of manageable steps.
First,
build your foundation for what you want to achieve
and get the support of key stakeholders in your organization.
Analyze your current safety culture by using HSL's safety climate tool
to give you a baseline that will act as your anchor moving forward.
Focus on your results,
use the survey data to engage and involve the
workforce in decisions about what needs to change,
and then form an action plan.
If you follow the model,
you'll be able to make evidence based decisions to develop your action plan.
And finally,
you should evaluate how you're doing
as it's important to keep the momentum going as part of your overall plan
for continuous improvement.
If you'd like to find out more about safety culture
or HSL's ascent model.
Join us on one of our first steps webinars
and ask for our free white papers by contacting product support at HSL.gSI.gov.uk.